Research candidate review

Run from the Evolution Lab checkout:

  python -m evolution_lab research --catalog /path/to/catalog.json \
    --evidence-root /path/to/evidence --out /path/to/new-run

For an exact replay, use the run's frozen catalog.json and pass the original
report's as_of value with --as-of. Referenced source bytes must remain available.
The output directory must be new. Read NEXT.txt for the compact handoff and
report.json for every candidate, source check, exclusion and ranking judgment.

Purpose

Check candidate-local prerequisites and compare declared priorities for end-to-end
latency, consumed tokens, and intent-matched verified outcomes. This is a curated
proposal filter, not an empirical discovery engine or proof of the best next step.
It does not establish workload frequency, user value, causal effect, or the value
of doing more research. This extends Evolution Lab's experiment
surface and reuses its existing factor registry. It does not execute experiments,
call models, query GitHub, modify the frozen judge or grant runtime authority.
Existing factor receipt importers and z0int ABAB quantitative selection remain
available for their own contracts. This command does not invent numeric priors
to satisfy those interfaces.

Input

The catalog is explicit research curation, not automatically extracted truth.
Use tests/test_research.py for a small complete example. Top-level fields:

- schema: evolution_lab.research.v1
- snapshot_at: timezone-qualified time of the source/ownership snapshot
- intent: objective, goals, invariants and available resources
- candidates: bounded decisions with their existing owner and source issue

Supported goals: e2e_latency, consumed_tokens, intent_validation.
Required invariants: independent_outcome, bounded_authority, all_attempts,
frozen_judge. Each candidate must explicitly preserve the selected invariants,
name task success and an independent oracle, and have different possible
dispositions for supports/refutes/ambiguous. These are contract checks; software
does not establish the semantic correctness of the curator's interpretation.

Each candidate includes:
- id, hypothesis, owner, issue, optional existing factor ID, relevant goals;
- intent contract, simpler comparator and decision outcomes;
- scope: exact code revisions, model, routing, permissions, frozen fixture IDs;
- evidence: reported D/I/R/C/X level, reconciled boolean, precise missing evidence,
  strongest result, counterevidence, and sources with local path/sha256/kind;
- next: action, summary, acceptance, stop, reopen, primary outcome, controls,
  cold/warm/retries/failures accounting, required resources, bounded mode;
- priority: low/medium/high impact, information, reuse and cost plus rationale;
- status: open/keep/kill/complete/hold; dependencies; optional owner lease.

Evidence source kinds are issue, source, review and receipt. All paths resolve
inside the explicit evidence root; outside-root paths are refused. A matching hash
proves bytes match the declared artifact. It does not prove the claim or transfer
it to another revision, workload or harness. D/I/R/C/X is a claim-scoped annotation:
documented, implemented, invoked/consumed, causal task benefit, replicated for the
decision. It is separate from deployment/critical-path status.

Keep exact tested source, binary/model, fixture and evidence-publication identities
separate. Put detailed provenance in the referenced existing receipt, not another
global schema. Preserve raw failures and negative evidence beneath the catalog.

Selection

1. Keep terminal/held dispositions and active owner leases out of the new-work queue.
   An owner with no declared expiry remains owned; an expired lease asks for an
   outcome check, not automatic reassignment. Old metadata asks for refresh.
2. Check explicit intent alignment and independent verification. Reject filler that
   cannot change a named engineering decision. Collapse exact hypothesis/scope/
   comparator/action aliases; this is not semantic near-duplicate detection.
3. Missing, changed or unreconciled artifacts require E-minus-1 reconciliation.
   Missing evidence never becomes an assertion that an experiment did not run.
4. Require pre-registration for a new experiment. Then apply resource/dependency
   constraints. Dependency KEEP/COMPLETE labels require bound reconciled evidence.
5. Gates affect the individual candidate. An unrelated evidence audit has no
   automatic precedence over a ready experiment. When a gate changes the proposed
   action (for example, experiment -> reconcile), keep it visible as unassessed.
   Do not assume the prerequisite is cheap or inherits the experiment's impact.
   To assess that action, explicitly curate it as next.action with its own priority.
6. Among assessed current actions, return the ordinal Pareto frontier across goal
   coverage, impact, information, reuse and cost. These ratings are explicit
   judgments, not measured information gain, cardinal scores or predicted savings.
   A single frontier item is a provisional curated suggestion among assessed
   actions. It does not dominate unassessed actions or establish global optimality.
   If choices remain incomparable, selected is null. ID order never picks a winner.

Reports use evolution_lab.research_report.v2. selected may be null even with
eligible work. selection_status distinguishes provisional_curated,
unresolved_comparison, unassessed_actions and no_eligible_action. Consumers must
retain unassessed prerequisites instead of treating them as rejected or low value.

The report hashes the catalog, module implementation, factor registry and report
contents. All source checks are included. Same input bytes and --as-of produce
the same result. Updating source bytes without updating the evidence assessment
causes reconciliation instead of silently retaining a prior recommendation.

Loop

Cache external updates using the existing collector, then reconcile their meaning
into the catalog. Retrieve primary artifacts before treating issue prose as a
receipt. Mark a row reconciled only for its exact claim/scope. Re-run research to
get the next discriminating action. After an independently judged result, preserve
the raw receipt, update the disposition and next missing evidence, and run again.
A KILL is a successful completed leaf. Reopen it only with new relevant evidence
and an explicit scope/decision update. No scheduler or background loop is installed.

Boundaries

The user/task oracle owns intent and correctness. AODL retains authority/legal
action validation; z0intelligence retains runtime cognition policy; Hermes executes;
z0evals owns independent evaluation; Tokenomics owns actual resource telemetry.
The research command checks declared contracts and produces a recommendation only.
It cannot certify model understanding of intent, authorize a paid experiment,
certify a confidence interval, or infer consumed-token savings from prepared context.

Choosing useful research begins outside these structural checks: identify an
actual user task, its independently checkable success conditions and constraints,
and its current end-to-end cost. Count failed attempts, retries, verification,
human correction and actual consumed resources. Wall time follows the critical
path; summing overlapping spans is not end-to-end latency. Keep missing usage
unknown. Avoid choosing a component because its benchmark is convenient.

An information-gaining experiment is useful when its result can change a valuable
decision, after accounting for the cost of research, rollout and maintenance over
an explicit reuse horizon. Evidence uncertainty alone does not justify another
audit. Compare the simpler baseline and deletion before adding a mechanism. If
workload relevance or cost/value tradeoffs are unknown, retain that uncertainty;
do not turn low/medium/high labels into expected economic value. The engine does
not yet estimate these quantities. Tests of its bookkeeping do not validate its
research strategy or prove faster user tasks.

Tests

  python -m unittest discover -s tests -p 'test_research.py'

Core research tests need no model or network. Full repository discovery additionally
uses the repository's optional JAX dependency: install the existing .[jax] extra
in an isolated environment if that dependency is absent.
